# 4 stages of growth in Faith

Dear brothers and sisters, today we will talk about faith. Faith is not merely a belief, okay? It's not faith in Jesus Christ that simply means belief in Jesus Christ, and we are saved by faith, but this means something else. It doesn't mean just accepting the idea or the concept that yes, Jesus is the Savior and He is God. No, this is not enough. This is a very basic and minimal thing. In Judea, 100 percent of the Jews believed in God, okay? They went to the temple, they prayed, they had the whole Scriptures, but they had no faith. Jesus told them, "How long will I endure you, this faithless and corrupt, sinful, adulterous generation?" And the disciples, okay, they could not cast out one demon from a young boy, a young guy, and they asked why they could not do that. The Lord told them, "Because of your lack of faith. You don't have faith." Okay? They believed, and they even followed Christ, and they even confessed Him as the Messiah, but that was not enough. In the Gospel of Luke, they asked Him, "Lord, increase our faith." What does it mean? What does it mean to increase our faith? So today, we will talk about faith as a power, as a power that enables us to do three things, okay? Three basic things: actions, decisions. Actions mean I decide something and I do it. Second is knowledge, contemplation, knowing the truth, okay? The power to grasp this truth. And the third is the toil, the labor that we exert over the long term to achieve some goals, okay? And all of this, that is on our part, brings about change in the external world and everywhere, okay? But we need to see how this power can be applied to us, how it changes our life. There are different stages, okay? Once we become Christians, we decide to follow Christ, and we will go through three basic stages, hopefully, okay? And maybe some people even reach the fourth stage, okay? So, on each stage, it will be a matter of our faith that is there or it's not there, okay? So, let us talk about the first stage, okay? The first stage is basically related to decision and the turn that we do, okay? First, we meet the truth, okay? And we make this decision to follow Christ, okay? We decide right now, right on the spot, we make this decision, and we decide to follow this, and it needs faith to be able to do such and make such a decision, okay? And this also means to decide to change your life, okay? I make a decision, I change my life, okay? This is a one-time event, and it requires our will, our judgment, our acknowledgment of truth, okay? We entrust ourselves to the Lord, and most importantly, this can be possible if we decide to repent, if we acknowledge that we are sinners and that we need to change our life, okay? So, repentance, decision to repent, okay? Thirty years, and it's a big decision. You are a sinner, you are dying, you need to understand this, okay? And then we decide that we follow Christ because only He can save us, only He can save us, okay? He is able to do that, and that means that He is the Savior, okay? So, we make this decision, this becomes clear for us, and then we decide because of this new direction, we decide to sacrifice ourselves to Him and whatever we have, including our way of life, including our property sometimes, okay? Remember that Christians in the beginning just sacrificed everything; they sold everything and brought it to the feet of the apostles because their decision was very strong, okay? But this is a one-time thing, basically; it doesn't last that long, okay? And on this stage, okay, when the person has made this decision, okay? The decision can be of different degrees, okay? Some people have lacking faith; they say, "Oh yes, yes, He is the Savior, but I don't want to change too much," okay? This decision is very weak, okay? Because one thing, how to test it, is prayer, okay? If you decide to follow Him, you will talk to Him; you will be willing to talk to Him, okay? And if people become Christian but they don't want to pray, this is...

...it. This is a problem. It means that something is missing there, okay? So, the person begins to pray, okay? And on this first stage, okay, this first stage, the Lord is giving us, okay, a credit. He is giving us grace and power, and we feel that He is with us. During the first maybe couple of years, maybe up to five years, usually, the person is like flying, okay? He has this feeling that he is with grace, he's with the Lord, the Lord is helping him, okay? But this is credit, okay. We should not think that this is because I am now close to God or I have some virtues. No, we don't have anything yet, okay? So, we have the true direction, the real direction, but in terms of virtuous life or being, okay, good Christians, no, we are not yet, okay? But we have this experience. Later, the Lord is, okay, stepping aside, okay, and saying, "Okay, now you go yourself, you do it yourself," okay? And we enter into the second stage of our Christian life, okay? Of course, this is a general way; it's much more complicated in real life, but overall, now we're speaking about the general structure, okay? So, this second step, the second stage, we don't feel anymore this help, and we feel that, okay, it's as though we're lacking. Where is the Lord? This grace is gone, and my sins are all back. My passions are all back, and many people become, okay, they have evil thoughts, they have issues against God, okay? They don't trust Him anymore. Sometimes they don't trust the church; they stop going to church. Some people, okay, leave the church even, okay? And at this period, also, some struggles come, okay? Some painful experiences, okay? And all of this is a test that the Lord wants us to go through, okay? The second stage is very difficult to go through, okay? And the Lord is waiting there; He is not far, okay? Maybe we think He's far, but no, He is not far. He is watching how we go through this stage, okay? So, what are some characteristics of this stage, okay, in terms of faith? Because here, on this stage, the way the faith works, this power of faith works differently, okay? Basically, the way it works is that we push ourselves; we break our old self, okay? We are not willing to go to church, but we push ourselves and we go there. We are not willing to pray, but we push ourselves. We are not willing to change; we have these desires, but we push ourselves. We push ourselves to repent and to change, okay? We are exerting this force, this power, and trying to get through this period, okay? So, this period needs a lot of toil. There's a spiritual toil when fasting is difficult; many things are becoming really difficult, okay? To love others is difficult, okay? We don't like them, and we don't have enough patience, okay? And sometimes we do something because we ought to do it, okay? Not because we love God so much, but because we know we need to do it; we ought to do it, okay? And we do it. Sacrifice—we are not willing to sacrifice to help others, to sacrifice our time, our money, okay? We don't, but we push ourselves, and we do it, okay? And this power that we exert is the power of faith, okay? And also, learning about faith, okay? This period is when we study, okay? A lot of study. We read the Bible, okay? We push ourselves to read theology, lives of saints, okay? And after a long effort, okay, this period may take years, many years, okay? We slowly get into the third stage, maybe with some ups and downs, okay? Sometimes it's not that smooth, okay? But eventually, we need to get to the third stage, okay? And the third stage that we get into is basically when we have joy awakening. We begin to feel joy in us following Christ, okay? For example, we begin to feel joy when we sacrifice something, not because of vain glory, but because we like to sacrifice our time, our energy for other people, for the Lord's sake. We are enjoying...

...ministry, some kind of ministry, even if it's very simple—maybe it's just sweeping the floors in the church—but we enjoy it. We feel that we are with the Lord, okay? We're doing something for the Lord. We have a willingness to go to church in the long term, okay? Long term, not because we're excited like in the beginning, when we were excited and went. No, in the long term, we feel, "Yes, we want to go there because this is where we meet with the church, with all the Christians together," okay? Now, we have another attitude. Our attitude naturally changes toward others, okay? We have more love and compassion for others. We pray; we begin to pray for them. We really feel that this is good, okay, to pray for them. We have humbleness; we feel that we are worse than anyone else, that people are better than us, okay? Also, slowly, we have assurance that the Lord will not abandon me, okay? Tomorrow, the day after, I rely on Him, okay? He will help me. I am entrusting myself to Him, okay? He says, "Don't worry about tomorrow," okay? We know that tomorrow He will take care. We're not becoming lazy and doing nothing, okay? We are still working hard, but we don't have any fear or depression about economic problems or some lack of support or some disadvantages in life situations, stuff like that. We know that it's all going according to the plan, and the Lord will take care of us no matter what happens—even war, nuclear war, anything. He will be with us, and that's most important, okay? And the last thing is, we lose this attachment to material things. We don't really care, okay? If we lose everything tomorrow—if it's burned, stolen, or destroyed—we don't mind. It's even easier for us, okay? Now, if it's all gone, fine. Just glory to God, okay? So, we don't have that attachment. This is also a sign that we are entering into this third, long-lasting, long-term condition, okay? Not like in the beginning, when it was just the start. This third, long-term condition of a Christian heart, okay, which is broken free from vainglory and other passions, okay, we are entering into it. And, basically, we are already able to conquer big passions, okay? We had some sins in the second stage. Sometimes, it took us many, many confessions, okay, to overcome some disease, okay, some same desire that we had. We were doing it again and again, okay, but at some point, we overcome it. This is when faith comes in—that means all our efforts are not in vain. We got into the next stage, okay? We're getting better, okay? So, you know, this is happening in the long term, okay? And some people, a few, okay, not many, will get into the fourth stage, okay? Because sometimes people ask, "Why in the early church were people able to do miracles? They were speaking different languages, preaching, healing—they just touched someone, and he was healed. They could prophesy about the future. Why don't we have this now? Why don't we have it? Has God changed or something?" No, nothing has changed, basically, okay? God is the same as He was, and His power is as great as it always was and will be, okay? We have changed. We are weak, we are selfish, we are proud, and we have all kinds of problems, okay? Lazy, too. So, the path is the same, okay? Today, I'm describing this path that we need to go through with the power of faith working in us all the way through to that stage, okay? And the third—the fourth stage, okay? Some signs that someone is getting into that fourth stage—and I'm telling you, it's not me, okay? It's not people whom you know; most likely, it's not you, okay? Some people get into that stage, okay? That stage has—I won't talk too much about it—but, for example, people pray, and right away, there is a result, okay? They pray for someone's health, and it comes, okay? Because their heart is so close to God. It's very honest and has no passion. It's directly...

...flowing to God, okay? And God has no reason not to grant it, okay? The person is asking for the right things, okay? They're not asking for wrong things from God, so God gives right away, okay? This is one sign. Another sign is the contemplation of truth, okay? These spiritual eyes are opening, and the person is able to grasp some things about the truth that they could not get in any other way, okay? Not by studying, by reading, or by listening to someone, okay? But they're getting this knowledge about some spiritual realities, okay? So, these are two signs, okay? I won't talk about others, okay? But we are basically going in this way, and this is the power of faith. The words, "If you have faith, you will move mountains," this is moving mountains. You pray, and things happen, okay? We need to get to that stage, okay? We need to aim at that stage, but it's not, of course, that easy or that fast. But we need to put this goal in front of us, okay? May the Lord help us on this path, help us to improve, to get better, to have this motivation to endure all the hardships, okay? On the third stage, also, the hardship, the sorrows—the attitude is different, okay? We enjoy that, okay? There are some hardships that I need to go through, to suffer, because it makes me closer to God. He suffered Himself, okay? Our attitude toward any sorrows or passions is also changing, okay? So, let us know that the path is out there, okay? And we can get to that point, but we just need to put in more effort and trust God that He will help us on this path. May the Lord bless you and give you this strong faith. Increase the faith in us, oh Lord. God bless.

