# Devil’s plan to conquer the Church

Dear brothers and sisters, just 30 years ago, almost half of the world was under communism. There was a very strong, very fierce competition between communist and capitalist countries. Less than half of the world was so-called democratic. It seemed as though this would continue, and the might, the military strength of the Soviet bloc was increasing, was on the rise. We know that communism was strongly against any religion, and there was persecution of the church in the Soviet Union and in many countries. In those countries where socialism or communism exists today, they still have religious policies that restrict any religion not under direct control of the Communist Party, like in China. 

Suddenly, the Soviet Union collapsed, and everybody felt free. Now it's a free world. There is still this impression that now, as though the devil is dead, the church is free to do whatever she wants, and everything is fine. Just nothing to worry about. However, if we think about this, we discover that there was no revolution that happened. This change fits very well into the overall strategy—the strategy of the communists. The communists said that at some point, the capitalist countries, which are not willing to go with us and which we cannot conquer directly, will just ripen and fall into our hands like a ripe fruit. 

Right now, the plans have changed—the plans of the people who have all the power in this world. I think now, with these policies that we see, there is little doubt that there are people who just have that power. And the people who have that power allow this to happen. We need to think about why and what we need to be aware of and cautious of, especially with what is happening now, because things are changing again, big time. 

The strategy of war tells us that if you cannot conquer someone, you need to love your enemy. There are two ways to conquer your enemy. One way is to use power, might, and military force. Another way is to use love. What does it mean? Just give him everything he wants. Give him all the rights, all the freedoms, all the goods, whatever he wants. Let him relax, get fat, sleep, and then he is yours. You just come and take him. No need to fight with him. 

This strategy is what is being done towards the church, towards every true Christian, and the church as an institution—the Orthodox Church, because other churches are not preventing these things, the Antichrist from coming. So we can see from what has happened that this strategy is taking place. We can see from the Old Testament, the experience of Israel, that it was falling away from God. During the wars with different tribes—Moab, Amalek, Moabite people—the Israelites were winning as long as God was with them. When these tribes, these other nations, saw this, they sent women, prostitutes, into the military camps of the Jews, of the Israelites. Adultery and fornication occurred, and God left. He left Israel, and Israel was hit hard. They were losing and were beaten by those foreign tribes. Eventually, Jerusalem was conquered by Babylon, by King Nebuchadnezzar. 

The prophet Ezekiel tells us that Israel became like a prostitute, giving herself to anyone for some gain or just for fun. This is the reason why Israel lost freedom, lost God's blessing, and only after deep repentance did they regain God's blessing step by step—only through a very strict religious life. This tells us about the problem with the church nowadays. If the church is relaxed—what do I mean by relaxed? Well, everybody has a house, a mortgage, property, a car, a good salary or some salary, buys food, goes to good restaurants, likes to buy nice clothes, thinks about these things all the time, how to go on vacation or somewhere else.

All of this—comfortable life, enjoyment, and things like this—makes us slaves, slaves of Mammon. After the communist collapse, everybody became capitalist, and all these opportunities were given. The sanction for sin was also given. "Do whatever, no sin. What sin? There is no sin. Just do whatever you like, guys. Enjoy life." This became the common ideology for everyone. And with all this promoted through movies and everywhere, this became the new task. You are free, but here is so much sin, so much information, so many nice goods, so that you are conquered by this stuff. You can believe whatever you want. And here comes both carnal fornication, adultery, with all this comfort and stuff, and also spiritual adultery, like with Israel. The spiritual adultery was when they embraced other religions, other cults, into the true religion. The same is happening now with us, with ecumenism. Ecumenism is the adultery of our days, the spiritual adultery. When all religions are about the same, everybody has something good, some truth, and everybody is walking to the same God. And we also can embrace something good from meditation, from Hinduism, Buddhism, Lamaism, all those things. The most obvious are the many denominations—I don't want to say directly, but many denominations now embrace everything. You can see in the news all these ecumenist activities when the Pope is setting incense in front of Pachamama, this idol, and many other things. And we have a lot of it now. So all this comes to creating one new religion, the religion of the Antichrist. 

Right now, we need to know that unless we become spiritually very vigilant, that we have clear values, that we don't become spiritually asleep, then we can win. Because Christ said, "Abandon yourself and follow me." This is what is crucial. We need to be ready to abandon everything for Christ—everything we have, our own life, our very life—and follow Christ and sacrifice our life for Him. But unfortunately, this is not what's happening. That's why we don't have missionaries, we don't have people willing to spend their time in the church. Why? They work, they want more money, and they explain, "Oh, I need money because I need to pay bills." And it's all related. It's all just one system of Mammon. We need to understand that. It makes us deprived, unable to serve God, unable to progress spiritually because we are trapped in this thing. 

So how can you make a slave from a free person? He is free, but you want him to become a slave. You need to make him addicted—to drugs, alcohol, something. He will think that he is free. He is freely going and buying alcohol. He thinks that he is free. But is he really free? The same logic. People will think that they are free, and they do now, but they become slaves of sin. Apostle Paul tells us about these things. Right now, it seems that we have so many Christians, Orthodox, but if all of them become shallow, become dependent on Mammon. With this coronavirus thing, we see it's like a rehearsal. The devil is testing, seeing how much people are relying on Mammon, how uncomfortable they will feel when some things they're used to are taken away. This is like a trial, a test to see what's the situation, how it worked. And eventually, he wants the church—almost all the church, 95%, 99%—to become like that and just fall into his hands. And that's it. We won't be able to resist what he will bring, this system, this regime of the Antichrist that will be brought like salvation, that you will be ready to embrace in order to preserve what you have and maybe even more in this life. 

So may the Lord give us wisdom, give us strength, make us live with Him in His salvation all the time.

This is what keeps us safe from all this deceit and all this slavery that is approaching and coming to every one of us. May the Lord help us and not allow us to sleep, to fall asleep, and to get fat spiritually. Okay? God bless. Christ is risen.

