# Orthodoxy on Hawaii & Miraculous Icon of Theotokos

Dear brothers and sisters, today I am on the islands of Hawaii, and behind me, you can see the beautiful scenery, the volcano, and the trees on my way back from Guam to Taiwan. I have a transit here, and I have a unique chance and a blessing to venerate, to build a group to venerate the holy icon of God of Hawaii. It is called the Hawaiian Iveron Icon of the Mother of God. This is a miracle-working icon that is producing myrrh, a very fragrant, oily liquid that is produced by a miracle, and I saw it myself. It is leaking from the icon and dripping into the casket that holds this icon. I want to introduce this icon and the Church of Hawaii, as well as the situation with the church here.

First of all, this land was visited by missionaries in the 18th century, and they eventually built a church here in 1815. Many of them stayed, and in the middle of the 19th century, Saint Innocent Veniaminov, later Metropolitan of Moscow, a very famous missionary, came to this land and also did mission work here. He is famous for developing missions in Alaska and the Aleutian Islands, which are not far from here. In fact, the Alaskan mission sent missionaries here to Hawaii to develop the mission further. Later, descendants of these missionaries also lived here and did a lot of farming, even into the 20th century. The mission here was developed by the Russian Church and continued until the mid-20th century, when the Church of America also joined forces and developed the mission here. At present, mainly two missions remain: the mission of the Russian Church, the Russian Orthodox Church Outside of Russia (ROCOR), and the mission of the Greek Orthodox Church.

Now, about the icon. The icon that is here is in the parish of ROCOR, and Father Athanasius Kole is the rector of this parish. He brought this icon yesterday for me to venerate, and we served an Akathist prayer service in front of it. The icon is very interesting because it is just a regular icon printed on cardboard in Russia. Thousands of icons like this are printed every day, and this one was bought at a shop in Toronto, Canada, and brought here by one of the Orthodox faithful. This icon began to produce myrrh in his house—a very fragrant liquid. Not too much at first, but later more and more, and now it is producing a lot. It is really leaking in large amounts. The myrrh is collected and then distributed to the faithful for anointment, and many miracles have happened.

We ourselves received this myrrh in the past in Taiwan, and I took it with me to East Timor when we were doing a mission there. One man who had a bad rash all over his body—red and itchy all the time—was anointed with the myrrh in East Timor, and the next day he was healed miraculously. Miracles like this have happened many times in India, the United States, and many other places. People have been healed of cancer and all kinds of diseases. It is truly a wonder how the Mother of God is expressing her love, care, and special blessing to this land.

This icon was later taken to the church and also to the United States to be inspected by bishops, who concluded that this is indeed a miraculous icon and that the miracle is from God—not some kind of trick or something else. After this, pilgrims from all over the world began coming here to venerate this icon. Please also come here whenever you have the opportunity to venerate this icon, to see how the mission is done here, and to contribute to the work of the mission. The mission is now active on these islands of Hawaii, but I also think it is a good start for missions in other countries of the Pacific and other islands, because here the parishioners come from all over the Pacific, from all those little islands.

Of course, many Asians come from Asia, Americans come from the U.S. and other countries, and there are also some Russians here. It is a very multicultural parish, similar to Taiwan, perhaps even more so. These people, through their relatives and friends in all those different islands, can help develop missions in other places as well. So, I am really hopeful that this can happen at some point. However, a lot of mission work still needs to be done here in Hawaii itself because it has a population of about one and a half million—it’s a big state, and it’s truly beautiful here. I really hope that every one of you can visit. I did not expect it to be so beautiful and nice as it is.  

This is just a brief introduction, and I can tell you more about it in the future if you’re interested. May God bless you and guide you.  

Thank you.

