# First Sri Lankan baptized Orthodox

Brothers and sisters, I'm now in Sri Lanka, in a place called Matara. This is the very southern tip of the island. The family is by the Indian Ocean. Today, we have the first Sri Lankan baptized Orthodox. Let me tell you a little bit about the mission here. The ultimate mission here began about three years ago by Father George Maximov, who came here. During these three years, he spoke to the person who got baptized, whose name is Andrew. Please pray for him. They communicated during all those three years, preparing for becoming Orthodox. Eventually, today, all this work bore fruit as Andrew became Orthodox. I believe that this is only the beginning of the mission here, the beginning of future mission advances. 

Tomorrow, I will travel to the middle of the island to a place called Hurunigala. There, the pastor of a large Protestant community will become Orthodox. Maybe not all of them will be baptized this time, but their preparation is ongoing. We're planning to visit many locations across the island, talking to ministers and people who are about to become Orthodox or are interested or willing. At this point, more than 100 people are ready. 

The church here developed in Hurunigala because of the influence of Catholics in the 16th century, particularly the Portuguese. They were already part of the Malabar Church here. The Malabar Church, as we know, was established by the Apostle Thomas. We don't know exactly when they arrived in Sri Lanka, but they did. Importantly, the Malabar Church later went into decline. We are not sure if there was any presence here ever, but now there are very good prospects. 

The mission comes with many temptations. Just yesterday, I had a fever. I think it was not COVID; I don't know all the symptoms, just heat, and I felt very tired, though not severely. I was even thinking that maybe the project would be better off. Father George wrote yesterday that he also experienced something like this in the past. He is over the event of doing something in the morning, but it's a challenge to overcome. I think somebody prayed for me very strongly. This morning, I woke up and the fever was gone, I have a normal temperature, and I feel well. 

Today, early in the morning, Andrew Holzman suggested that we have the baptism right here in the Indian Ocean. Please pray for the future of the mission here, for Andrew, and for the mission in every country that still doesn't have a future, because such countries are still out there, like Sri Lanka. May the Lord bless every one of us, now during this time of Epiphany, the baptism of the Lord Himself, that we begin to believe in the mission here in Sri Lanka, which is glorious. I will also keep you updated from Hurunigala, the place where I will go, and everything will be successful. Thank you.

