# Our Faith will Determine the Future of the World

Dear brothers and sisters, we are now in the sixth week of the Great Lent, and it's actually the last week, because the following week will be the Passion Week. So the Great Lent itself will finish, and then we have another six days of strict fasting, which is preparing us for the Resurrection. Those six days of fasting are actually the Pascha of Passion. It's not just the preparation for the Pascha of Resurrection. Then we will celebrate the Pascha of Resurrection. So now we are in this last week of the Great Lent, we are getting ready for the entrance of the Lord into Jerusalem. This will be the beginning of the Passion Week, this coming Sunday. And this week, I want to share with you my recent thoughts about Christian life.

There are two things which the Lord is expecting from us the most. We sometimes don't really understand what He is willing, what He is expecting from me. So that becomes like believing in Jesus, but not changing anything about how I live, what I do. Yes, just going to church every Sunday or every, I don't know how often, or praying at home, but basically nothing changes. And this is the big problem, the big issue that we have, because if our faith doesn't change anything about our life, then we don't have faith. So what are the two things the Lord wants us to do to actually have our life be pleasing to Him? These are the spiritual life, which is asceticism, fasting, and prayer. And the second one is mission, because He told His disciples that you will be My witnesses to this world. And He called all of them apostles. So we see that all of the disciples of Christ, they became apostles. At the time we didn't have any other types of saints. We didn't have saints blessed or martyrs, in the sense of dying. No, but all of them, they became apostles. And some apostles, of course, became martyrs. And even a martyr is an apostle, because he is doing testimony. The word martyr means to witness. He is witnessing his love for Christ and his faith in resurrection by sacrificing his life. So this gives us a very important concept of becoming a missionary, everyone. And not just by saying things, but by our life, by sharing what we have inside. And to have Christ inside, we need asceticism, we need fasting. So it all comes together.

And today I want to share just one thing about fasting, because I've talked about it a lot before. Fasting, even the scientists now, they've discovered that eating, when you want to eat, it's not because you are lacking some nutrients, it's because of addiction that we have. That the connection between me willing to eat something is related to addiction that I have for food, for eating now, and this much, and this kind of food. This is not brought by Christians or not even by psychologists, but by biologists, by those who study the biology of nutrition, what processes are going on in your body. And they said, they say you can search that, that this is the reason. They studied the relationship between fasting and exercise. And they've found out that people who are doing exercise and they want to eat more, this doesn't come from the need for nutrients. This comes from their addiction to food. There is this interaction inside the human body, when we have different things going on. I cannot explain everything in scientific language, because I'm not a scientist. But you can search for that and you'll find that this is the primary reason why we want to eat and why we have this. Now I want to eat. It's not coming because I'm hungry, because I'm lacking nutrients. That's a mistake. That's common sense, but it's a mistake. It's coming from, okay, I have this desire, I have this addiction to eat so much and to eat this and that and that much often. So what does it tell us? It tells us. It's not pleasing to accept, I know, to say, oh, I'm addicted. This is like alcoholism or drugs.

And people don't want to admit to themselves that they have any kind of addiction, especially if they're not drug addicts or any other, you know, harmful behaviors. But all of us, all of us, we have some form of addiction to food. This is why fasting, this basic idea of fasting, is about limiting our desires, limiting our addiction, and not simply following what the body tells us. It could also be psychological, of course, and even spiritual. So if someone cannot fast, cannot do any fasting, even small, this means that they will not be able to fight their passions. They will not be able to change their life to follow Christ. So nothing. They cannot do anything in terms of faith. Their faith is going to be dead, no matter what they believe. So this is something to think about. We are learning to constrain, to control our desires, to overcome our addictions. And through this, we will also learn how to exert the willpower to follow Christ. In the Gospel, the Lord says that the kingdom of heaven is taken by force. And those who exert the force will see it, they will grasp it. Very powerful language. If we just leave it like that—"I just leave, yes, I believe, yes, I believe, I sometimes go to church, but fasting is not for me"—then, sorry, the kingdom of heaven is not for you either. We just have to be honest with ourselves.

Okay, so this is something I wanted to share about fasting, but the main topic I wanted to share with you today is mission. And let us look not only into the Gospel and the Bible, but also into some documents or materials that come from the opposite side—from those who serve mammon and the devil. I also sometimes read the stuff that comes from there, as it can help us better understand what's going on. How do those people perceive Christians, faith, and Jesus? Recently, I was looking through some materials on Freemasons. These articles are more than 100 years old. I’ve also read one of Lenin’s works. And again, I want to share with you what those people who serve Satan say. It’s clear that they are slaves of mammon. They are tools of the devil. I don’t want to talk about Masons today, because Masons 100 years ago and Masons nowadays are quite different. But let’s look at those Masons from 100-150 years ago. Their goal was to destroy the Church, to make Christian societies secular, to promote consumerism, the power of capital, or to promote materialism, socialism, and other utopias. It was all against Christianity. Their common enemy was the Christian faith. So what do they say? And their goal, ultimately—and still is, actually—though Masons don’t talk much about their ideology today, in those days it was quite clear that their goal was to build the kingdom of the Antichrist. This system, this world order, would bring prosperity to those who are chosen, to the enlightened ones. And it would be prosperity without a cross, without Christ. It would be another god, and that god is Satan, who would be the source of everything. They are basically Satanists. And most of them don’t even conceal that.

So they say in their works that their greatest enemy is the Christian missionary. And they have to do everything to prevent Christian missionaries from going anywhere, especially to places that are not yet evangelized, such as Asia, Oceania, and Africa. They say, "We have to do everything to stop that." They are also afraid of any initiatives taken by Christians. They can predict what’s going to happen with the masses, with those people who are motivated by material things, by income, or by other factors, or who are afraid of economic conditions. But if someone has faith in Jesus and trusts in the true Lord, they will have this freedom and initiative, and they will bring this to others. They will share this with others, and for the enemies of Christ, this is the biggest threat.

And the same thing we actually see with socialists and with Marx, because why he is so much against Christianity is that, for him, all his theories about the dialectic progress of humanity—from capitalism to imperialism to socialism, communism—all these things, no matter where you are on this spectrum, only work if everybody is subject to this kind of decision-making. It can gain material benefit, a bright future, collectivism, or other things, but it cannot have trust in Jesus as an element of the equation, because everything just breaks apart. All his theories, all his utopia, will fail. So we can see from Marx's socialism, from the Masons, from Lenin, that they hate the Church and they hate Christianity for one reason: because it is the biggest obstacle—it is actually the only real obstacle—to their building of the world of the Antichrist. And it is not a coincidence. The biggest threat for the devil is the most important priority for Christ, and that is why He made all His disciples apostles and sent them to preach. 

So here we can see why, at some point, the kingdom of the Antichrist will arise. It will happen because the faith of those who serve Satan will be stronger than the faith of those who serve Christ. Because if we just believe and we don’t do anything, there is no power, there is no output, there is no fruit of our faith, and then it’s dead. And there is no point in having such Christians—they are just cut out. The tree that doesn’t bring fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. And this is what’s going to happen when, eventually, the Lord allows the Antichrist to rule this world. Not for long, but still, that’s going to happen. And we can see that in the times of Lenin. Why did those crazy Bolsheviks take power and cause so much harm? They killed tens of millions of people and built their utopian regime. They succeeded because they believed so much in what they were doing, in these ideas that come from Satan. They were crazy, they were obsessed with those ideas, and they went everywhere. They became revolutionaries, they blew up things, they killed people, they destroyed everything. They had this trust that what they did made sense, that they would reach their goal, that they would succeed. They had this crazy trust in Satanism, and they succeeded. The Lord allowed them: "You are so strong in your beliefs? Try it." And that was a great pain for the Church and for all Christians. 

But that was also something we need to learn: that the faith of Christians—of course, we don’t use the same methods as they do—but if our faith were stronger, then many more people would become Orthodox. And it’s a big mistake to think, "Well, what can I do? What can I change? If people don’t come to church, what can I do?" We can do a lot. We can see it from the example of the Soviet Union. In the Soviet Union, the government stopped any mission activity, and everybody became atheists. And as soon as this was lifted—as soon as there was even a little bit of ability to speak about your faith—many people became Orthodox. Not all, but still, a lot compared to Soviet times. And this doesn’t mean that during those Soviet times, the population was worse than later, after Gorbachev. No, they were actually much better. But still, they became atheists. And what does that mean? It means that when we share our faith, a lot of people are going to come. 

There is a nice example. Just recently, one priest shared with me about their parish in Russia. A lot of people come just to light a candle and then leave. And there is one guy who is a little bit "crazy." That guy is not afraid of anything, and he just approaches those newcomers, those who just pass by the church.

He comes to them and says, "Come here and go to confess." He pulls them to the priest. They say, "What’s going on?" But he is not afraid. He doesn’t have any barriers. He just goes and pulls them. He’s like a crazy guy. He really has some mental problems. But maybe it’s coming from the Lord—we don’t know. And actually, from doing that, a lot of them remain in the church, gain faith, and become stable parishioners. So this is an interesting example, which means that we shouldn’t just expect people to come on their own and become faithful by themselves. Very often, we have to go out, do outreach, and talk to people about faith. And to be able to do that, you have to have Christ inside your heart. And for that, you will need asceticism, fasting, prayer, and a spiritual life. So these things are all related. 

Let us ask the Lord to make our faith alive, to give us this eagerness, this vision of how we can do it, and to make everything we do—whether it’s our job, housework, icon painting, chanting in the church, or whatever we do, whether church-related, home-related, or work-related—be subject to mission and spirituality, fasting and prayer. It has to be related. It cannot be just one world, and then on Sundays, I go to church. It has to be all tied up into one thing, because only spiritual life and mission will give purpose to everything else that we do. 

May the Lord help us, give us motivation to do mission, and fulfill this calling. May He help us on this path to make our lives pleasing to Him and to fulfill our calling as Christians. May the Lord be with you and give you His blessing during these holy days of the Great Lent. Amen. God bless.

