# What is the Kingdom of Heaven Is it “at hand” or inside us How to avoid a fake

Dear brothers and sisters, recently, one subscriber asked me, "What is the kingdom of heaven?" I understood the importance of this question. Even though it may seem self-evident for every Christian, it's something we don't talk about because everybody knows the kingdom of heaven, of course. But in reality, we don't really know. Even most pastors and bishops would have difficulty saying something particularly about the kingdom of heaven, and very often, they would even say wrong things about it. 

This is so sad because if we don't know where we're going, if we don't really understand the final goal, first, we lose motivation to go there, and second, we may easily accept fake ideas. There are actually thousands of different surrogates of heaven that exist, and they are easier to understand. Very often, people go for them. For example, in the Orthodox world, all of a sudden, people in Russia and many other countries were given the idea of a bright communist future as the kingdom of heaven, instead of the actual kingdom of heaven, which nobody knows where and when. Here you have this bright future, progress, industry, and a happy society, and most people believed in that. Why? Because they were not taught well enough about the kingdom of heaven. Partly, it's a mistake of the pastors, and partly, it's because people were not eager enough.

And of course, this happened in the West as well. Even from the time of Catholicism, from the breakup of the Roman Church, and later with the Protestants, there was already a great misunderstanding about salvation and the kingdom of heaven. Actually, salvation and the kingdom of heaven are directly related. When we talk about salvation, we talk about the kingdom of heaven.

So, what questions arise when we raise this question, when we raise this topic? It's so important to raise it because the apostles were preaching the kingdom of heaven. The Lord Himself, in His sermon, spoke about repentance and that the kingdom of heaven is at hand. What does "at hand" mean? And then He said, "Where is the kingdom of heaven? It's inside, it's in your hearts." What does that mean? Why should we even bother if it's already in our hearts?

Many questions arise. First of all, there is a big mistake when we say that the kingdom of heaven is something that will be decided after I die. Now, yes, it's somewhere there, the saints are there, but for me, well, I should live a good life, and then I have hope. Then there will be a judgment, and after this judgment, I either go to heaven or go to hell. This is the basic understanding, which is partly true. Partly true is false. Why is it partly true? Because for the Bible and the language of the Bible, it has its own conception of time. For the Bible, the future already exists in the present, and the past also exists in the present through memory. This is why we have commemoration. And we see that, for example, in the Divine Liturgy, which we serve every Sunday (sometimes every day in some churches), there is a prayer by the priest that he says: "We commemorate, we remember now everything from creation," and then he lists, "and we remember the kingdom of the future which Thou hast granted to us." I mean, how confusing that is. Is it the future kingdom, but You granted it to us already in the past, and we remember it, recall it now during this liturgy? I mean, this is so confusing. Well, we need a liturgical mindset and heart. This is what is happening with us. We transform our everything—our mentality, our perception. We become children of heaven, with the wisdom of heaven, with the logic. And this reality of the kingdom of heaven has to happen in the Divine Liturgy and in every participant of this liturgy.

