# What form does Idolatry take today

Dear brothers and sisters,

Today's video will be a little bit scary because all of us will discover that we are idol worshippers to some extent. But don't be too scared, okay? This is not about calling names; this is about understanding the reality, okay? And then working with this reality. If we want to be healed, we need to know the sickness, okay? Know yourself—this is the first call of the Holy Fathers. Then you will know God. So, we need to be critical, we need to be humble, and this will help us in our repentance, with our eagerness to change, to become apostles in the sense of gaining God into our heart and being able to share Him with others, okay? This is the goal of every Christian, okay? And this is what makes us Christians, okay? Unless we reach that, we are not yet Christians in the full sense—myself included, okay? So, let us talk about this.

Some time ago, I had a video on the revelation—a fake revelation, not the previous book of Revelation—enlightenment, sorry, fake enlightenment. You can go back and see it, okay? Today, I want to talk about idol worshipping and what it is spiritually because normally we would say an idol worshipper is someone who goes to those temples and does sacrifices to idols which are standing there. He is a pagan, okay? Like here in Taiwan, 97% of the population are pagans. They go there either because they really believe and have some communication expectation from those idols, or they go there because of custom, because they're supposed to, okay? But the problem is that anyone, okay, who doesn't worship the true God every day in his heart continuously actually becomes an idol worshipper.

Normally, we think, "Well, we get educated, and this idol worshipping is just some superstition. It is maybe some uneducated folk who are in darkness, okay? They used to believe all kinds of Draculas or some other stuff, and they have these superstitions, okay? They believe in the Sun, in Mother Earth, in I don't know, some goddesses, I don't know, be it Poseidon or Zeus, Jupiter, or something else. These people, they just don't understand that the sea, if it's not a god, it's just a sea; the Sun is not God's soul, it's just the Sun, it's just a star, okay? It's shining." So, we learn some scientific knowledge, and okay, we get rid of it, okay? Everything is fine; we're not idol worshippers anymore.

Well, we discover that idol worshipping is not a matter of education; it's not a matter of knowing something. It is a spiritual need, and this need is fulfilled with something else. As soon as you get upset or don't believe in some mythical gods, you will accept something else as a substitute, okay? This is how the human heart is designed; the human soul is designed. It cannot be just on its own, just free from any delusion, okay? The spirit is craving for something—for something to rely upon, for something to become the source of salvation, of help, of I don't know, enlightenment, okay? But we will talk about this mechanism a bit later in this video.

Well, first, I'll bring some examples. In the Soviet times, in the Soviet Union, and in many other socialist countries, okay, people said, "Oh, we are so learned, we are educated. Everybody goes to school now; we have science, technology, okay? Of course, we don't believe in those superstitions and stuff like that." Well, and then in the times of, like, the early Soviet Union, okay, all the way till the '60s, okay, there was a belief in the Communist Party, in progress. It actually dragged all through the '70s in a bright future, into almighty science, technology, okay? All these things are idols. And there were also idols like Yuri Gagarin, okay, who went to space, all those big projects, okay, like the Dnipro gas, okay, those power plants, and you know, other big projects that the whole country was working on. They all became idols. If you read news of those days, okay, it's about building something big, huge, okay? Go into space, this is this and that. These all are idols, okay, of those days. Some later, it became...

...like movie heroes, okay? Everybody loved them, and basically, those became idols, okay? But eventually, the Soviet Union collapsed, so now it's not that big of a kind of idol worshipping. But the more common now is the so-called capitalist or postmodern, post-capitalist idol worshipping. Well, it's about—for many people—money, comfort, some brands, what kind of car you have, okay? It's an idol; it's important. Watch—what is your watch, okay? What would you boast about, okay? It may be your career, your profession, because your idol is in the West. Many people compare their houses, okay? "My house is 1 million; yours is 5 million," okay? Somebody lives in a rented apartment, okay? People compare these things, and it is some reality that is very important for them, okay? They dedicate all their life pursuing something like that. So, they think their trust is in real estate, and their glory is in that real estate that they want others to see. That becomes their idol, okay?

So, all kinds of—I know we have this postmodernist idols, which are even more bizarre, okay? That you are, I don't know, zero-carbon something, okay? Now they open that pub in London where you go drink beer, and you do the pedaling so the electricity is coming from there. So, they go zero-carbon bar or something like that. So, some people are crazy about that. But yoga, about I don't know, New Age stuff—that's new idols. And what about all those actors and musicians, pop singers, Lady Gaga, or something else? I don't know what is popular now, but those become idols, and they're called—you have the official name, idols, okay? In those magazines, they call them idols, okay? Because this is what they are—idols, okay? So, it is about idol worshipping. It seems to be funny, not so serious, but spiritually, that's why it's attracting millions of people.

Or those sports, the games, okay? Olympics—that's an idol, attracting so much money, so many people to go watch people kicking some ball, okay? Emptiness. So, we need to see that the reason is spiritual reality. Actually, sport was also an idol in the Soviet times, and it still is in those countries. Politics—that's another idol, okay? How many people worship Trump, okay? Or Democrats, or whatever—those are idol worshippers for many of them. It is idol worshipping. If you discover that you can argue with somebody about, okay, who is a better president or something like that, you get on—just step aside and say, "Okay, whatever. Well, let's talk about Jesus; let's pray." If you're really into some argument on that thing, you're an idol worshipper, okay?

So, sometimes, even here in the church, okay, we have services; we praise martyrs for crushing the idols, for overthrowing demons, and then we go out, and we are crazy about politics, about I don't know, consumption, about purchasing some stuff, okay? Isn't it? We need to understand there's something wrong about it. We either want to crush the idols, or we want to worship, okay? It doesn't go together. So, we can be ten times Orthodox, ultra-Orthodox Christians, but that would be only nominal, only formal. In reality, we will be idol worshippers. Many priests are idol worshippers; this is the reality we need to face, okay? But first of all, we begin with ourselves, okay? It's very easy to see idol worshippers everywhere but not yourself. So, this is something to be careful with.

So, an idol is normally not something which is standing out there or written in the book on the page on some commercial. No, an idol is first of all in here, in your heart, okay? It can be invisible. You yourself can become an idol; you worship yourself. Why is this happening? This is happening because every man has a fallen nature. It's a nature—human nature—inherited from Adam and Eve, and it has this flaw to it. It's not a sin; it's not what Catholics call original sin. We don't call it a sin, but it's like a primordial flaw. And because of this, when we don't have...

...a relationship with the true God constantly ongoing, we will tend to substitute it with something else. And it's not about education; it's about a spiritual thing. We will try to find what to rely on. Is it savings? Is it my diploma? Is it my friends or relatives? Is it something? For some people, their kids are their idols, okay? So, they would put all their hope into their kids because this is where they want to get salvation and glory. So, this is idol worshipping. It is so common. I mean, we look around; this is everywhere in us, okay? Our love towards our kids or our spouse becomes idol worship. This is a scary reality, but it is true, okay? The true love is always self-sacrificing, and it's always overcoming selfishness and some passions. But we are driven by a big force towards some activities, okay? And that force is what? That force is an unclean spirit, which is pushing us towards some goal. And the only spirit which is clean is the Holy Spirit. And we need to be honest with ourselves that very often, it's not the Holy Spirit driving us towards pursuing or doing this and that; it's some other spirit.

For example, for young people, games have become their idols. They can spend so much time in those games, trying to find some pleasure from them. Or for bloggers, okay? For anyone who is posting constantly on Facebook, collecting likes—okay, a "like" is a little sacrifice. It's like a candle; somebody is putting a candle towards you as an idol, okay? Be careful with those things. This is why it may be so pleasing, so you know, driving when you get more likes. Oh, that's mainly vainglory, okay? When people are posting some kind of useless stuff, and they cannot do without it, it becomes an addiction, okay? That means that this has become your idol of vainglory, of many things, okay? You rely upon this thing.

Now, let us also consider confession, okay? We confess; we receive Holy Communion; we try to live a holy life, stop sinful addictions or habits. Then, after some time—maybe a week, a month later—we are pulled towards something that we have stopped, okay? Be it, I don't know, playing games, or chatting all the time, or watching movies every night, or something else, okay? Or, I don't know, for some people, drinking, going to some parties. You feel lonely; you want a party, okay? When that comes, you should know that this is my idol worship. I have not overcome some of the, you know, okay, let's call it demon worshipping because this passion is behind it—an unclean spirit—and it's pushing me towards that direction. I think, "I go to the church; I receive communion; I confess; I am Orthodox; I'm Christian; no problem." But no, okay, if you give in to that force—it's coming from you; it's not coming from somewhere else—then we give in to remaining idol worshippers, okay?

So, let us first be honest with ourselves: "I am still an idol worshipper, even though I think I was in the church for 20 years, for 50 years. I'm maybe even a priest or a monk or whatever. I'm still an idol worshipper." This is reality; this is truth. Let us be honest with ourselves. Let us see those spirits—the spirits of vainglory, of greed, of mammon, all kinds of mammon, anger, okay? You come home, and you get angry at your kids, and then you say, "Why? Why am I like this?" Okay? Then you keep without it for some time, then again—that means that you still give in to this idol of anger.

To summarize, the two main idols are the belly and mammon, and they are actually one. The belly is just something you want to consume, want to satisfy, receive some comfort, something tasty, okay? And mammon is basically you want to grab, I know, some resources, some funds, to have more power, to have glory, which is associated with that, and then stuff like that. So, these are great idols which are present everywhere, and we need to be watchful, okay? We cannot really serve God well; we cannot really do any testimony; we cannot really...

be Christians if we are still worshiping idols. So, this has never gone anywhere, okay? We live in Babylon; we live in idolatry. It's all around us, but first, we need to begin with ourselves, okay? We need to set ourselves on the path of spiritual life to see that there is no other option. We either live with God or with idols, okay? The idol of "I'm just autonomous" is fake; this never happens, okay? If you're without God, you will be with the demons, okay? You will be with your idols, okay? And you won't even notice it, but you will be blinded, and you will be a slave, eventually as a sacrifice to the devil, okay? This is how it ends. May the Lord keep us away from every uncleanness, from any desire, from any mistake.

Another form of idol, which is very subtle, is when we have some big drive, and we think it's spiritual. This is very common in Catholicism, but it's also present in the Orthodox Church. We want to do something that we think, "Okay, this is for God. Yeah, I do so many Jesus prayers, or I go into ministry, do some ministry, or something like that, and I have a big drive for that." Well, stop and think: Where is this coming from? Can I preserve the peace of heart? Can I pray? Can I be humble while doing this, or does it make me stirred up and, you know, with some zeal in my eyes, okay? We need to learn how to distinguish the eagerness of faith, which the Lord is expecting from us, from this carnal, emotional, and fake delusion that masks itself as though this is eagerness, okay? So, this will bring us also to idol worshiping, okay? This is something very difficult to distinguish, more so than other idols which I've mentioned. But the more we read the Holy Fathers, the more we pray and live with Christ, the more we gain this ability from the Lord to distinguish the spirit coming from Him from the spirit coming from mammon.

May the Lord help us, give us His strength, wisdom, guidance, and blessing to minister to Him every day of our life and to glorify Him. God bless, brothers and sisters.

